# Python gRPC Client for EventStoreDB

This [Python package](https://pypi.org/project/esdbclient/) provides a Python
gRPC client for [EventStoreDB](https://www.eventstore.com/).

This client has been developed in collaboration with the EventStoreDB
team. Although not all the features of EventStoreDB are supported
by this client, many of the most useful features are presented
in an easy-to-use interface.

This client has been tested to work with EventStoreDB LTS versions 21.10,
without and without SSL/TLS, and with Python versions 3.7 to 3.11. There
is 100% test coverage. The code has typing annotations, checked with mypy.
The code is formatted with black and isort, and checked with flake8. Poetry
is used for package management during development, and for building and
publishing distributions to [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/esdbclient/).

## Synopsis

The `ESDBClient` class can be imported from the `esdbclient` package.

Probably the three most useful methods of `ESDBClient` are:

* `append_events()` This method can be used to record events in a particular
"stream". This is useful for example when executing a command in an application
that mutates an aggregate. This method is "atomic" in that either all or none of
the events will be recorded.

* `read_stream_events()` This method can be used to retrieve all the recorded
events in a "stream". This is useful for example when reconstructing an aggregate
before executing a command in an application.

* `subscribe_all_events()` This method can be used to receive all recorded
events across all "streams". This is useful in downstream event-processing
components, and supports processing events with "exactly-once" semantics (see below).

The example below uses an "insecure" EventStoreDB server running locally on port 2114.

```python
import uuid

from esdbclient import ESDBClient, NewEvent


# Construct ESDBClient with an EventStoreDB URI.

client = ESDBClient(
    uri="esdb://localhost:2114?Tls=false"
)


# Generate new events. Typically, domain events of different
# types are generated in a domain model, and then serialized
# into NewEvent objects. An aggregate ID may be used as the
# name of a stream in EventStoreDB.

stream_name1 = str(uuid.uuid4())
event1 = NewEvent(
    type='OrderCreated',
    data=b'{"order_number": "123456"}'
)
event2 = NewEvent(
    type='OrderSubmitted',
    data=b'{}'
)
event3 = NewEvent(
    type='OrderCancelled',
    data=b'{}'
)


# Append events to a new stream. The value returned from the
# append_events() method is the overall position in the database
# of the last new event recorded by this operation. The returned
# "commit position" value may be used in a user interface to poll
# a downstream event-processing component before it presents an
# up-to-date eventually consistent materialized view.

commit_position1 = client.append_events(
    stream_name=stream_name1,
    current_version=None,
    events=[event1, event2],
)

# Append events to an existing stream. The "current version" is the
# "stream position" of the last recorded event in a stream. We have
# recorded two new events, so the "current version" is 1. Incorrect
# value will cause 'WrongCurrentVersion' to be raised.

commit_position2 = client.append_events(
    stream_name=stream_name1,
    current_version=1,
    events=[event3],
)


# Read events from a stream. The recorded events may be
# deserialized to domain events objects of different types,
# then used to reconstruct an aggregate in a domain model.

recorded = client.read_stream_events(
    stream_name=stream_name1
)

# Stream 'stream_name1' has three events.
assert len(recorded) == 3

# Allocated stream positions are zero-based and gapless.
assert recorded[0].stream_position == 0
assert recorded[1].stream_position == 1
assert recorded[2].stream_position == 2

# Allocated commit positions increase monotonically.
assert commit_position2 > commit_position1

# The 'type', 'data' and 'id' values are recorded faithfully.
assert recorded[0].type == "OrderCreated"
assert recorded[0].data == b'{"order_number": "123456"}'
assert recorded[0].id == event1.id

assert recorded[1].type == "OrderSubmitted"
assert recorded[1].data == b'{}'
assert recorded[1].id == event2.id

assert recorded[2].type == "OrderCancelled"
assert recorded[2].data == b'{}'
assert recorded[2].id == event3.id


# Start a catch-up subscription to receive all recorded
# events across all streams. A catch-up subscription may
# be used in a downstream event-processing component to
# receive recorded events from a particular commit position.
# The first "commit position" in an EventStoreDB database is 0.

last_saved_commit_position = 0

catch_subscription = client.subscribe_all_events(
    commit_position=last_saved_commit_position
)


# Iterate over the catch-up subscription. Process each
# recorded event in turn. In an atomic database transaction
# save the event's "commit position" with any new state
# generated by processing the event. Use the component's
# last saved "commit position" when restarting the subscription.


received = []
for event in catch_subscription:
    last_saved_commit_position = event.commit_position
    received.append(event)

    if last_saved_commit_position == commit_position2:
        # Stop so we can continue with the example.
        catch_subscription.stop()


assert received[-3].type == "OrderCreated"
assert received[-2].type == "OrderSubmitted"
assert received[-1].type == "OrderCancelled"


# Close the client after use.

client.close()
```

See below for more details.

For an example of usage, see the [eventsourcing-eventstoredb](
https://github.com/pyeventsourcing/eventsourcing-eventstoredb) package.

## Table of contents

<!-- TOC -->
* [Install package](#install-package)
  * [From PyPI](#from-pypi)
  * [With Poetry](#with-poetry)
* [EventStoreDB server](#eventstoredb-server)
  * [Run container](#run-container)
  * [Stop container](#stop-container)
* [EventStoreDB client](#eventstoredb-client)
  * [Import class](#import-class)
  * [Construct client](#construct-client)
* [Connection strings](#connection-strings)
  * [Two schemes](#two-schemes)
  * [User info string](#user-info-string)
  * [Query string](#query-string)
  * [Examples](#examples)
* [Event objects](#event-objects)
  * [The NewEvent class](#the-newevent-class)
  * [The RecordedEvent class](#the-recordedevent-class)
* [Streams](#streams)
  * [Append events](#append-events)
  * [Append event](#append-event)
  * [Idempotent append operations](#idempotent-append-operations)
  * [Read stream events](#read-stream-events)
  * [Get current version](#get-current-version)
  * [How to implement snapshotting with EventStoreDB](#how-to-implement-snapshotting-with-eventstoredb)
  * [Read all events](#read-all-events)
  * [Get commit position](#get-commit-position)
  * [Get stream metadata](#get-stream-metadata)
  * [Set stream metadata](#set-stream-metadata)
  * [Delete stream](#delete-stream)
  * [Tombstone stream](#tombstone-stream)
* [Catch-up subscriptions](#catch-up-subscriptions)
  * [Subscribe all events](#subscribe-all-events)
  * [Subscribe stream events](#subscribe-stream-events)
  * [How to implement exactly-once event processing](#how-to-implement-exactly-once-event-processing)
* [Persistent subscriptions](#persistent-subscriptions)
  * [Create subscription](#create-subscription)
  * [Read subscription](#read-subscription)
  * [How to write a persistent subscription consumer](#how-to-write-a-persistent-subscription-consumer)
  * [Get subscription info](#get-subscription-info)
  * [List subscriptions](#list-subscriptions)
  * [Update subscription](#update-subscription)
  * [Create stream subscription](#create-stream-subscription)
  * [Read stream subscription](#read-stream-subscription)
  * [Get stream subscription info](#get-stream-subscription-info)
  * [List stream subscriptions](#list-stream-subscriptions)
  * [Update stream subscription](#update-stream-subscription)
  * [Replay parked events](#replay-parked-events)
  * [Delete persistent subscription](#delete-persistent-subscription)
* [Connection](#connection)
  * [Reconnect](#reconnect)
  * [Close](#close)
* [Asyncio client](#asyncio-client)
  * [Synopsis](#synopsis-1)
* [Notes](#notes)
  * [Regular expression filters](#regular-expression-filters)
* [Contributors](#contributors)
  * [Install Poetry](#install-poetry)
  * [Setup for PyCharm users](#setup-for-pycharm-users)
  * [Setup from command line](#setup-from-command-line)
  * [Project Makefile commands](#project-makefile-commands)
<!-- TOC -->

## Install package

It is recommended to install Python packages into a Python virtual environment.

### From PyPI

You can use pip to install this package directly from
[the Python Package Index](https://pypi.org/project/esdbclient/).

    $ pip install esdbclient

### With Poetry

You can use Poetry to add this package to your pyproject.toml and install it.

    $ poetry add esdbclient

## EventStoreDB server

The EventStoreDB server can be run locally using the official Docker container image.

### Run container

For development, you can run a "secure" EventStoreDB server using the following command.

    $ docker run -d --name eventstoredb-secure -it -p 2113:2113 --env "HOME=/tmp" eventstore/eventstore:21.10.9-buster-slim --dev

As we will see, your client will need an EventStoreDB connection string URI as the value
of its `uri` constructor argument. The connection string for this "secure" EventStoreDB
server would be:

    esdb://admin:changeit@localhost:2113

To connect to a "secure" server, you will usually need to include a "username"
and a "password" in the connection string, so that the server can authenticate the
client. With EventStoreDB, the default username is "admin" and the default password
is "changeit".

When connecting to a "secure" server, your client will also need an SSL/TLS certificate
as the value of its `root_certificates` constructor argument. The client uses the
SSL/TLS certificate to authenticate the server. For development, you can either use the
SSL/TLS certificate of the certificate authority used to create the server's certificate,
or when using a single-node cluster, you can use the server certificate itself. You can
get the server certificate with the following Python code.


```python
import ssl

server_certificate = ssl.get_server_certificate(addr=('localhost', 2113))
```

You can also start an "insecure" server using the following command.

    $ docker run -d --name eventstoredb-insecure -it -p 2114:2113 eventstore/eventstore:21.10.9-buster-slim --insecure

The connection string URI for this "insecure" server would be:

    esdb://localhost:2114?Tls=false

As we will see, when connecting to an "insecure" server, there is no need to include
a "username" and a "password" in the connection string. If you do, these values will
be ignored by the client, so that they are not sent over an insecure channel.

Please note, the "insecure" connection string uses a query string with the field-value
`Tls=false`. The value of this field is by default `true`.

### Stop container

To stop and remove the "secure" container, use the following Docker commands.

    $ docker stop eventstoredb-secure
	$ docker rm eventstoredb-secure

To stop and remove the "insecure" container, use the following Docker commands.

    $ docker stop eventstoredb-insecure
	$ docker rm eventstoredb-insecure


## EventStoreDB client

This EventStoreDB client is implemented in the `esdbclient` package with
the `ESDBClient` class.

### Import class

The `ESDBClient` class can be imported from the `esdbclient` package.

```python
from esdbclient import ESDBClient
```

### Construct client

The `ESDBClient` class has one required constructor argument, `uri`, and one
optional constructor argument, `root_certificates`.

The `uri` argument is expected to be an EventStoreDB connection string URI that
conforms with the standard EventStoreDB "esdb" or "esdb+discover" URI schemes.

For example, the following connection string specifies that the client should
attempt to create a "secure" connection to port 2113 on "localhost", and use the
client credentials "username" and "password" when making calls to the server.

    esdb://username:password@localhost:2113?Tls=true

The client must be configured to create a "secure" connection to a "secure" server,
or alternatively an "insecure" connection to an "insecure" server. By default, the
client will attempt to create a "secure" connection. And so, when connecting to an
"insecure" server, the connection string must specify that the client should attempt
to make an "insecure" connection.

The following connection string specifies that the client should
attempt to create an "insecure" connection to port 2114 on "localhost".
When connecting to an "insecure" server, the client will ignore any
username and password information included in the connection string,
so that usernames and passwords are not sent over an "insecure" connection.

    esdb://localhost:2114?Tls=false

Please note, the "insecure" connection string uses a query string with the field-value
`Tls=false`. The value of this field is by default `true`. Unless the connection string
URI includes the field-value `Tls=false` in the query string, the `root_certificates`
constructor argument is also required.

When connecting to a "secure" server, the `root_certificates` argument is expected to
be a Python `str` containing PEM encoded SSL/TLS root certificates. This value is
passed directly to `grpc.ssl_channel_credentials()`. It is used for authenticating the
server to the client. It is commonly the certificate of the certificate authority that
was responsible for generating the SSL/TLS certificate used by the EventStoreDB server.
But, alternatively for development, you can use the server's certificate itself.

In the example below, the constructor argument values are taken from the operating
system environment. This is a typical arrangement in a production environment. It is
done this way here so that the code in this documentation can be tested with both
a "secure" and an "insecure" server.

```python
import os

client = ESDBClient(
    uri=os.getenv("ESDB_URI"),
    root_certificates=os.getenv("ESDB_ROOT_CERTIFICATES"),
)
```

## Connection strings

An EventStoreDB connection string is a URI that conforms with one of two possible
schemes: either the "esdb" scheme, or the "esdb+discover" scheme.

The syntax and semantics of the EventStoreDB URI schemes are described below. The
syntax is defined using [EBNF](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extended_Backus–Naur_form).

### Two schemes

The "esdb" URI scheme can be defined in the following way.

    esdb-uri = "esdb://" , [ user-info , "@" ] , grpc-target, { "," , grpc-target } , [ "?" , query-string ] ;

In the "esdb" URI scheme, after the optional user info string, there must be at least
one gRPC target. If there are several gRPC targets, they must be separated from each
other with the "," character. Each gRPC target should indicate an EventStoreDB gRPC
server socket, by specifying a host and a port number separated with the ":" character.
The host may be a hostname that can be resolved to an IP address, or an IP address.

    grpc-target = ( hostname | ip-address ) , ":" , port-number ;


The "esdb+discover" URI scheme can be defined in the following way.

    esdb-discover-uri = "esdb+discover://" , [ user-info, "@" ] , cluster-domainname , [ "?" , query-string ] ;

In the "esdb+discover" URI scheme, after the optional user info string, there must be a
domain name which should identify a cluster of EventStoreDB servers. The client will use
a DNS server to resolve the domain name to a list of addresses of EventStoreDB servers,
by querying for 'A' records. In this case, the port number "2113" will be used to
construct gRPC targets from the addresses obtained from 'A' records provided by the
DNS server. Therefore, if you want to use the "esdb+discover" URI scheme, you will
need to configure DNS when setting up your EventStoreDB cluster.

With both the "esdb" and "esdb+discover" URI schemes, the client firstly obtains
a list of gRPC targets: either directly from "esdb" connection strings; or indirectly
from "esdb+discover" connection strings via DNS. This list of targets is known as the
"gossip seed". The client will then attempt to connect to each gRPC target in turn,
attempting to call the EventStoreDB Gossip API to obtain information about the
EventStoreDB cluster. A member of the cluster is selected by the client, according
to the "node preference" option. The client may then need to close its
connection and reconnect to the selected server.

### User info string

In both the "esdb" and "esdb+discover" schemes, the URI may include a user info string.
If it exists in the URI, the user info string must be separated from the rest of the URI
with the "@" character. The user info string must include a username and a password,
separated with the ":" character.

    user-info = username , ":" , password ;

The user info is sent by the client as "call credentials" in each call to a "secure"
server, in a "basic auth" authorization header. This authorization header is used by
the server to authenticate the client. The authorization header is not sent to
"insecure" servers.

### Query string

In both the "esdb" and "esdb+discover" schemes, the optional query string must be one
or many field-value arguments, separated from each other with the "&" character.

    query-string = field-value, { "&", field-value } ;

Each field-value argument must be one of the supported fields, and an
appropriate value, separated with the "=" character.

    field-value = ( "Tls", "=" , "true" | "false" )
                | ( "TlsVerifyCert", "=" , "true" | "false" )
                | ( "ConnectionName", "=" , string )
                | ( "NodePreference", "=" , "leader" | "follower" | "readonlyreplica" | "random" )
                | ( "DefaultDeadline", "=" , integer )
                | ( "GossipTimeout", "=" , integer )
                | ( "MaxDiscoverAttempts", "=" , integer )
                | ( "DiscoveryInterval", "=" , integer )
                | ( "MaxDiscoverAttempts", "=" , integer )
                | ( "KeepAliveInterval", "=" , integer )
                | ( "KeepAliveInterval", "=" , integer ) ;

The table below describes the query field-values supported by this client.

| Field               | Value                                                                 | Description                                                                                                                                                       |
|---------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Tls                 | "true", "false" (default: "true")                                     | If "true" the client will create a "secure" gRPC channel. If "false" the client will create an "insecure" gRPC channel. This must match the server configuration. |
| TlsVerifyCert       | "true", "false" (default: "true")                                     | This value is currently ignored.                                                                                                                                  |
| ConnectionName      | string (default: auto-generated version-4 UUID)                       | Sent in call metadata for every call, to identify the client to the cluster.                                                                                      |
| NodePreference      | "leader", "follower", "readonlyreplica", "random" (default: "leader") | The node state preferred by the client. The client will select a node from the cluster info received from the Gossip API according to this preference.            |
| DefaultDeadline     | integer (default: `None`)                                             | The default value (in seconds) of the `timeout` argument of client "write" methods such as `append_events()`.                                                     |
| GossipTimeout       | integer (default: 5)                                                  | The default value (in seconds) of the `timeout` argument of gossip read methods, such as `read_gossip()`.                                                         |
| MaxDiscoverAttempts | integer (default: 10)                                                 | The number of attempts to read gossip when connecting or reconnecting to a cluster member.                                                                        |
| DiscoveryInterval   | integer (default: 100)                                                | How long to wait (in milliseconds) between gossip retries.                                                                                                        |
| KeepAliveInterval   | integer (default: `None`)                                             | The value of the "grpc.keepalive_ms" gRPC channel option.                                                                                                         |
| KeepAliveTimeout    | integer (default: `None`)                                             | The value of the "grpc.keepalive_timeout_ms" gRPC channel option.                                                                                                 |


### Examples

Here are some examples of EventStoreDB connection string URIs.

The following URI will cause the client to connect to, and get
cluster info, from "secure" server socket `localhost:2113`. And
then to connect to a "leader" node. And also to use "admin" and
"changeit" as the username and password when making calls to
EventStoreDB API methods.

    esdb://admin:changeit@localhost:2113


The following URI will cause the client to get cluster info from
"insecure" server socket 127.0.0.1:2114.  And then to connect to
a "leader" node.

    esdb://127.0.0.1:2114?Tls=false


The following URI will cause the client to get cluster info from
addresses in DNS 'A' records for cluster1.example.com. And then
to connect to a "leader" node. And use a default deadline of 5
seconds when making calls to EventStore API "write" methods.

    esdb+discover://admin:changeit@cluster1.example.com?DefaultDeadline=5


The following URI will cause the client to get cluster info from either
localhost:2111, or localhost:2112, or localhost:2113. And then to connect
to a "follower" node.

    esdb://admin:changeit@localhost:2111,localhost:2112,localhost:2113?NodePreference=follower


The following URI will cause the client to get cluster info from addresses in
DNS 'A' records for cluster1.example.com. And to configure "keep alive" timeout
and interval in the gRPC channel.

    esdb+discover://admin:changeit@cluster1.example.com?KeepAliveInterval=10000&KeepAliveTimeout=10000


Please note, the client is insensitive to the case of fields and values. If fields are
repeated in the query string, the query string will be parsed without error. However,
the connection options used by the client will use the value of the first field. All
the other field-values in the query string with the same field name will be ignored.
Fields without values will also be ignored.

If the client's node preference is "leader" and the node becomes a
"follower", the client will attempt to reconnect to the current leader when a method
is called that expects to call a leader. Methods which mutate the state of the database
expect to call a leader. For such methods, the HTTP header "requires-leader" is set to
"true", and this header is observed by the server, and so a node which is not a leader
that receives such a request will return an error. This error is detected by the client,
which will then close the current gRPC connection and create a new connection to the
leader. The request will then be retried with the leader.

If the client's node preference is "follower" and there are no follower
nodes in the cluster, then the client will raise an exception. Similarly, if the
client's node preference is "readonlyreplica" and there are no read-only replica
nodes in the cluster, then the client will also raise an exception.

The gRPC channel option "grpc.max_receive_message_length" is automatically
configured to the value `17 * 1024 * 1024`. This value cannot be changed.


## Event objects

This package defines a `NewEvent` class and a `RecordedEvent` class. The
`NewEvent` class should be used when writing events to the database. The
`RecordedEvent` class is used when reading events from the database.

### New events

The `NewEvent` class should be used when writing events to an EventStoreDB database.
You will need to construct new event objects before calling the `append_events()`
and `append_event()` methods.

The `NewEvent` class is a frozen Python dataclass. It has two required constructor
arguments (`type` and `data`) and three optional constructor arguments (`metadata`,
`content_type` and `id`).

The required `type` argument is a Python `str`, used to describe the type of
domain event that is being recorded.

The required `data` argument is a Python `bytes` object, used to state the
serialized data of the domain event that is being recorded.

The optional `metadata` argument is a Python `bytes` object, used to indicate any
metadata of the event that will be recorded. The default value is an empty `bytes`
object.

The optional `content_type` argument is a Python `str`, used to indicate the
kind of data that is being recorded. The default value is `'application/json'`,
which indicates that the `data` was serialised using JSON. An alternative value
for this argument is the more general indication `'application/octet-stream'`.

The optional `id` argument is a Python `UUID` object, used to specify the unique ID
of the event that will be recorded. If no value is provided, a new version-4 UUID
will be generated.

```python
new_event1 = NewEvent(
    type='OrderCreated',
    data=b'{"name": "Greg"}',
)
assert new_event1.type == 'OrderCreated'
assert new_event1.data == b'{"name": "Greg"}'
assert new_event1.metadata == b''
assert new_event1.content_type == 'application/json'
assert isinstance(new_event1.id, uuid.UUID)

event_id = uuid.uuid4()
new_event2 = NewEvent(
    type='ImageCreated',
    data=b'01010101010101',
    metadata=b'{"a": 1}',
    content_type='application/octet-stream',
    id=event_id,
)
assert new_event2.type == 'ImageCreated'
assert new_event2.data == b'01010101010101'
assert new_event2.metadata == b'{"a": 1}'
assert new_event2.content_type == 'application/octet-stream'
assert new_event2.id == event_id
```

### Recorded events

The `RecordedEvent` class is used when reading events from an EventStoreDB
database. The client will return event objects of this type from all methods
that return recorded events, such as `read_stream_events()`, `subscribe_all_events()`,
and `read_subscription()`. You do not need to construct recorded event objects.

Like `NewEvent`, the `RecordedEvent` class is also a frozen Python dataclass. It has
all the attributes that `NewEvent` has (`type`, `data`, `metadata`, `content_type`, `id`)
and some additional attributes that follow from the fact that an event was recorded
(`stream_name`, `stream_position`, `commit_position`).

The `type` attribute is a Python `str`, used to indicate the type of an event
that was recorded.

The `data` attribute is a Python `bytes` object, used to indicate the data of an
event that was recorded.

The `metadata` attribute is a Python `bytes` object, used to indicate the metadata of
an event that was recorded.

The `content_type` attribute is a Python `str`, used to indicate the type of
data that was recorded for an event. It is usually `application/json`, indicating
that the data can be parsed as JSON. Alternatively, it is `application/octet-stream`.

The `id` attribute is a Python `UUID` object, used to indicate the unique ID of an
event that was recorded.

The `stream_name` attribute is a Python `str`, used to indicate the name of a
stream in which an event was recorded.

The `stream_position` attribute is a Python `int`, used to indicate the position in a
stream at which an event was recorded.

In EventStoreDB, a "stream position" is an integer representing the position of a
recorded event in a stream. Each recorded event is recorded at a position in a stream.
Each stream position is occupied by only one recorded event. New events are recorded at the
next unoccupied position. All sequences of stream positions are zero-based and gapless.

The `commit_position` attribute is a Python `int`, used to indicate the position in the
database at which an event was recorded.

In EventStoreDB, a "commit position" is an integer representing the position of a
recorded event in the database. Each recorded event is recorded at a position in the
database. Each commit position is occupied by only one recorded event. Commit positions
are zero-based and increase monotonically as new events are recorded. But, unlike stream
positions, the sequence of successive commit positions is not gapless. Indeed, there are
usually large differences between the commit positions of successively recorded events.

Please note, in EventStoreDB 21.10, the `commit_position` of all `RecordedEvent` objects
obtained from `read_stream_events()` is `None`, whereas events objects obtained from
`read_all_events()` have the actual commit position. This was changed in version 22.10,
so that event objects obtained from both `read_stream_events()` and `read_all_events()`
have the actual commit position. The `commit_position` attribute of the `RecordedEvent`
class is annotated with the type `Optional[int]` for this reason only.


```python
from esdbclient.events import RecordedEvent

recorded_event = RecordedEvent(
    type='OrderCreated',
    data=b'{}',
    metadata=b'',
    content_type='application/json',
    id=uuid.uuid4(),
    stream_name='stream1',
    stream_position=0,
    commit_position=512,
)
```


## Streams

In EventStoreDB, a "stream" is a sequence of recorded events that all have
the same "stream name". There will normally be many streams in a database,
each with many recorded events. Each recorded event has a position in its stream
(the "stream position"), and a position in the database (the "commit position").
Stream positions are zero-based and gapless. Commit positions are also zero-based,
but are not gapless.

The methods `append_events()`, `read_stream_events()` and `read_all_events()` can
be used to read and record in the database.

### Append events

*requires leader*

The `append_events()` method can be used atomically to record a sequence of new events.
If the operation is successful, it returns the commit position of the last event in the
sequence that has been recorded.

This method has three required arguments, `stream_name`, `current_version`
and `events`.

The required `stream_name` argument is a Python `str` that uniquely identifies a
stream to which a sequence of events will be appended.

The required `current_version` argument is expected to be either a Python `int`
that indicates the stream position of the last recorded event in the stream, or
`None` if the stream does not yet exist or has been deleted. The stream positions
are zero-based and gapless, so that if a stream has two events, the `current_version`
should be 1. If an incorrect value is given, this method will raise a
`WrongCurrentVersion` exception. This behavior is designed to provide concurrency
control when recording new events. The correct value of `current_version` for any stream
can be obtained by calling `get_current_version()`. However, the typical approach is to
use the stream position of the recorded events as the version number of a reconstructed
aggregate, and to use the current version of the aggregate as the `current_version` when
appending new aggregate events. This ensures the consistency of the recorded state of
the aggregate, and forces operations that generate new aggregate events to be retried with a freshly
reconstructed aggregate when a `WrongCurrentVersion` exception is encountered.
This controlling behavior can be disabled by setting the value of the
`current_version` argument to `-1`.

The required `events` argument is expected to be a sequence of new event objects. The
`NewEvent` class should be used to construct new event objects. The `append_events()`
operation is atomic, so that either all or none of the new events will be recorded. It
is not possible with EventStoreDB atomically to record new events in more than one stream.

This method also has an optional `timeout` argument, which is a Python `float`
that sets a deadline for the completion of the gRPC operation.

In the example below, a new event, `event1`, is appended to a new stream. The
stream does not yet exist, so `current_version` is `None`.

```python
# Construct a new event object.
event1 = NewEvent(type='OrderCreated', data=b'data1')

# Define a new stream name.
stream_name1 = str(uuid.uuid4())

# Append the new events to the new stream.
commit_position1 = client.append_events(
    stream_name=stream_name1,
    current_version=None,
    events=[event1],
)
```

In the example below, two subsequent events are appended to an existing
stream. The stream, `stream_name1`, so far has one recorded event, and so
the correct value of `current_version` is `0`.

```python
event2 = NewEvent(type='OrderUpdated', data=b'data2')
event3 = NewEvent(type='OrderDeleted', data=b'data3')

commit_position2 = client.append_events(
    stream_name=stream_name1,
    current_version=0,
    events=[event2, event3],
)
```

The returned values, `commit_position1` and `commit_position2`, are the
commit positions in the database of the last events in the recorded sequences.
That is, `commit_position1` is the commit position of `event1` and
`commit_position2` is the commit position of `event3`.

Commit positions that are returned in this way can be used by a user interface to poll
a downstream component until it has processed all the newly recorded events. For example,
consider a user interface command that results in the recording of new events, and an
eventually consistent materialized view in a downstream component that is updated from
these events. If the new events have not yet been processed, the view might be stale,
or out-of-date. Instead of displaying a stale view, the user interface can poll the
downstream component until it has processed the newly recorded events, and then display
an up-to-date view to the user.


### Append event

*requires leader*

The `append_event()` method is like `append_events()` but can be used only to write a
single new event to a stream. If the operation is successful, it returns the commit
position of the newly recorded event.

This method has three required arguments, `stream_name`, `current_version` and `event`.

The required `stream_name` argument is a Python `str` that uniquely identifies a
stream to which a sequence of events will be appended.

The required `current_version` argument is expected to be either a Python `int`
that indicates the stream position of the last recorded event in the stream.

The required `event` argument is expected to be a single new event object. The event
object is expected to be an instance of the `NewEvent` class.

This method also has an optional `timeout` argument, which is a Python `float`
that sets a deadline for the completion of the gRPC operation.


### Idempotent append operations

The `append_event()` and `append_events()` and methods are "idempotent", in that
if the methods are called with new events whose `id` attribute values equal those
of recorded events in the named stream immediately after the stream position specified
by the value of the `current_version` argument, then these methods will return the
commit position of the last new event, without making any changes to the database.

Sometimes it may happen, when calling `append_event()` or `append_events()`, that
the new events are successfully recorded but somehow a connection issue occurs before
the successful call can return successfully to the client. We cannot be sure if
the events were recorded or not, and so we may wish to retry. If the events were in
fact successfully recorded, it is convenient for the retried operation to return
successfully without raising an exception. If those new events were in fact not recorded,
and in the meantime no other new events were recorded in that stream, then it makes sense
that the new events will be recorded when the append operation is retried. Of course,
if a `WrongCurrentVersion` exception is raised when retrying the operation, then an
application command which generated the new events in the context of already recorded
events may need to be executed again. Alternatively, a suitable error might be displayed
by the application, with an up-to-date view of the recorded data, giving a user of the
application an opportunity to decide if they still wish to proceed with their original
intention.

The example below shows the `append_events()` method being called again with
`event3` and `current_version=0`. We can see that repeating the call to
`append_events()` returns successfully.

```python
# Retry appending event3.
commit_position_retry = client.append_events(
    stream_name=stream_name1,
    current_version=0,
    events=[event2, event3],
)
```

We can see that the same commit position is returned as above.

```python
assert commit_position_retry == commit_position2
```

By calling `read_stream_events()`, we can also see the stream has been unchanged
despite the `append_events()` method having been called twice with the same arguments.
That is, there are still only three events in the stream.

```python
events = client.read_stream_events(
    stream_name=stream_name1
)

assert len(events) == 3
```

This idempotent behaviour depends on the `id` attribute of the `NewEvent` class.
This attribute, by default, is assigned a new and unique version-4 UUID when an
instance of `NewEvent` is constructed. The `id` argument can be used when
constructing `NewEvent` objects to set the value of this attribute.


### Read stream events

The `read_stream_events()` method can be used to get events that have been appended
to a stream. This method returns a Python `tuple` of recorded event objects. The
recorded event objects are instances of the `RecordedEvent` class.

This method has one required argument, `stream_name`.

The required `stream_name` argument is a Python `str` that uniquely identifies a
stream from which recorded events will be returned.

The `read_stream_events()` method also has four optional arguments,
`stream_position`, `backwards`, `limit`, and `timeout`.

The optional `stream_position` argument is a Python `int` that can be used to
indicate the position in the stream from which to start reading. The default value
of `stream_position` is `None`. When reading a stream from a specific position in the
stream, the recorded event at that position will be included, both when reading
forwards from that position, and when reading backwards.

The optional `backwards` argument is a Python `bool`. The default value of `backwards`
is `False`, which means the stream will be read forwards, so that events are returned
in the order they were recorded. If `backwards` is `True`, the events are returned in
reverse order.

If `backwards` is `False` and `stream_position` is `None`, the stream's events will be
returned in the order they were recorded, starting from the first recorded event. This
is the default behavior of `read_stream_events()`. If `backwards` is `True` and
`stream_position` is `None`, the stream's events will be returned in reverse order,
starting from the last recorded event.

The optional `limit` argument is a Python `int` which restricts the number of events
that will be returned. The default value of `limit` is `sys.maxint`.

The optional `timeout` argument is a Python `float` which sets a deadline for
the completion of the gRPC operation.

The example below shows the default behavior of this method, which is to return all
the recorded events of a stream forwards from the first recorded events to the last.

```python
events = client.read_stream_events(
    stream_name=stream_name1
)

assert len(events) == 3
assert events[0].id == event1.id
assert events[1].id == event2.id
assert events[2].id == event3.id
```

The example below shows how to use the `stream_position` argument to read a stream
from a specific stream position to the end of the stream. Stream positions are
zero-based, and so `stream_position=1` corresponds to the second event that was
recorded in the stream, in this case `event2`.

```python
events = client.read_stream_events(
    stream_name=stream_name1,
    stream_position=1,
)

assert len(events) == 2
assert events[0].id == event2.id
assert events[1].id == event3.id
```

The example below shows how to use the `backwards` argument to read a stream backwards.

```python
events = client.read_stream_events(
    stream_name=stream_name1,
    backwards=True,
)

assert len(events) == 3
assert events[0].id == event3.id
assert events[1].id == event2.id
assert events[2].id == event1.id
```

The example below shows how to use the `limit` argument to read a limited number of
events.

```python
events = client.read_stream_events(
    stream_name=stream_name1,
    limit=2,
)

assert len(events) == 2
assert events[0].id == event1.id
assert events[1].id == event2.id
```

The `read_stream_events()` method will raise a `NotFound` exception if the named stream
has never existed or has been deleted.

```python
from esdbclient.exceptions import NotFound


try:
    client.read_stream_events('does-not-exist')
except NotFound:
    pass  # The stream does not exist.
else:
    raise Exception("Shouldn't get here")
```

Please note, this method streams recorded events from the server and then
constructs and returns a Python `tuple`. In case you don't want the client to
finish streaming events from the database before it returns, you can instead
use the `iter_stream_events()` method, which returns an iterable "read response"
object. A "read response" is an iterator, and not a sequence. Recorded events can
be obtained by iterating over the "read response" object. It streams recorded events
from the server as the iteration proceeds. The iteration will automatically stop
when there are no more recorded events to be returned. The streaming of events,
and hence the iterator, can also be stopped prematurely by calling the `stop()`
method on the "read response" object.

In fact, the `read_stream_events()` method calls `iter_stream_events()` and passes
the "read response" iterator into the Python `tuple` constructor. However, the
`read_stream_events()` method is decorated with retry and reconnect decorators,
whilst the `iter_stream_events()` method is not. This means that all errors due to
connection issues will be caught by the retry and reconnect decorators when calling
the `read_stream_events()` method, but not when calling `iter_stream_events()`. The
`iter_stream_events()` method has no such decorators because the streaming only starts
when iterating over the "read response" starts, which means that the method returns
before the streaming starts, and so there is no chance for any decorators to catch
any connection issues.

Nevertheless, if you are reading a very large stream, then you might prefer to call
`iter_stream_events()`, and to begin iterating through the recorded events whilst
they are being streamed from the server, rather than both waiting and having them
all accumulate in memory. Because of the risk of connection issues arising during
the streaming of recorded events from the server, you will need to care about
connection issues when iterating over the "read response" object returned from
`iter_stream_events()`.

### Get current version

The `get_current_version()` method is a convenience method that essentially calls
`read_stream_events()` with `backwards=True` and `limit=1`. This method returns
the value of the `stream_position` attribute of the last recorded event in a
stream. If a stream does not exist, the returned value is `None`. The returned
value is the correct value of `current_version` when appending new events to
a stream.

This method has one required argument, `stream_name`.

The required `stream_name` argument is a Python `str` that uniquely identifies a
stream from which a stream position will be returned.

This method also has an optional `timeout` argument, that
is expected to be a Python `float`, which sets a deadline
for the completion of the gRPC operation.

In the example below, the last stream position of `stream_name1` is obtained.
Since three events have been appended to `stream_name1`, and because positions
in a stream are zero-based and gapless, so the current version is `2`.

```python
current_version = client.get_current_version(
    stream_name=stream_name1
)

assert current_version == 2
```

If a stream has never existed or has been deleted, the returned value is `None`,
which matches the required value of the `current_version` argument both when
appending the first event of a new stream, and also when appending events to
a stream that has been deleted.

```python
current_version = client.get_current_version(
    stream_name='does-not-exist'
)

assert current_version is None
```

### How to implement snapshotting with EventStoreDB

Snapshots can improve the performance of aggregates that would otherwise be
reconstructed from very long streams. However, it is generally recommended to design
aggregates to have a finite lifecycle, and so to have relatively short streams,
thereby avoiding the need for snapshotting. This "how to" section is intended merely
to show how snapshotting of aggregates can be implemented with EventStoreDB using
this Python client.

Event-sourced aggregates are typically reconstructed from recorded events by calling
a mutator function for each recorded event, evolving from an initial state
`None` to the current state of the aggregate. The function `get_aggregate()` shows
how this can be done. The aggregate ID is used as a stream name. The exception
`AggregateNotFound` is raised if the aggregate stream is not found.

```python
class AggregateNotFound(Exception):
    """Raised when an aggregate is not found."""


def get_aggregate(aggregate_id, mutator_func):
    stream_name = aggregate_id

    # Get recorded events.
    try:
        events = client.read_stream_events(
            stream_name=stream_name,
            stream_position=None
        )
    except NotFound as e:
        raise AggregateNotFound(aggregate_id) from e
    else:
        # Reconstruct aggregate from recorded events.
        aggregate = None
        for event in events:
            aggregate = mutator_func(aggregate, event)
        return aggregate
```

Snapshotting of aggregates can be implemented by recording the current state of
an aggregate as a new event.

If an aggregate object has a version number that corresponds to the stream position of
the last event that was used to reconstruct the aggregate, and this version number
is recorded in the snapshot metadata, then any events that are recorded after the
snapshot can be selected using this version number. The aggregate can then be
reconstructed from the last snapshot and any subsequent events, without having
to replay the entire history.

We will use a separate stream for an aggregate's snapshots that is named after the
stream used for recording its events. The name of the snapshot stream will be
constructed by prefixing the aggregate's stream name with `'snapshot-$'`.

```python
SNAPSHOT_STREAM_NAME_PREFIX = 'snapshot-$'

def make_snapshot_stream_name(stream_name):
    return f'{SNAPSHOT_STREAM_NAME_PREFIX}{stream_name}'


def remove_snapshot_stream_prefix(snapshot_stream_name):
    assert snapshot_stream_name.startswith(SNAPSHOT_STREAM_NAME_PREFIX)
    return snapshot_stream_name[len(SNAPSHOT_STREAM_NAME_PREFIX):]
```

Now, let's redefine the `get_aggregate()` function, so that it looks for a snapshot event,
then selects subsequent aggregate events, and then calls a mutator function for each
recorded event.

Notice that the aggregate events are read from a stream for serialized aggregate
events, whilst the snapshot is read from a separate stream for serialized aggregate
snapshots. We will use JSON to serialize and deserialize event data.


```python
import json


def get_aggregate(aggregate_id, mutator_func):
    stream_name = aggregate_id
    recorded_events = []

    # Look for a snapshot.
    try:
        snapshots = client.read_stream_events(
            stream_name=make_snapshot_stream_name(stream_name),
            backwards=True,
            limit=1
        )
    except NotFound:
        stream_position = None
    else:
        assert len(snapshots) == 1
        snapshot = snapshots[0]
        stream_position = deserialize(snapshot.metadata)['version'] + 1
        recorded_events.append(snapshot)

    # Get subsequent events.
    try:
        events = client.read_stream_events(
            stream_name=stream_name,
            stream_position=stream_position
        )
    except NotFound as e:
        raise AggregateNotFound(aggregate_id) from e
    else:
        recorded_events += events

    # Reconstruct aggregate from recorded events.
    aggregate = None
    for event in recorded_events:
        aggregate = mutator_func(aggregate, event)

    return aggregate


def serialize(d):
    return json.dumps(d).encode('utf8')


def deserialize(s):
    return json.loads(s.decode('utf8'))
```

To show how `get_aggregate()` can be used, let's define a `Dog` aggregate class, with
attributes `name` and `tricks`. The attributes `id` and `version` will indicate an
aggregate object's ID and version number. The attribute `is_from_snapshot` is added
here merely to demonstrate below when an aggregate object has been reconstructed using
a snapshot.

```python
from dataclasses import dataclass


@dataclass(frozen=True)
class Aggregate:
    id: str
    version: int
    is_from_snapshot: bool


@dataclass(frozen=True)
class Dog(Aggregate):
    name: str
    tricks: list
```

Let's also define a mutator function `mutate_dog()` that can evolve the state of a
`Dog` aggregate given various different types of events, `'DogRegistered'`,
`'DogLearnedTrick'`, and `'Snapshot'`.

```python
def mutate_dog(dog, event):
    data = deserialize(event.data)
    if event.type == 'DogRegistered':
        return Dog(
            id=event.stream_name,
            version=event.stream_position,
            is_from_snapshot=False,
            name=data['name'],
            tricks=[],
        )
    elif event.type == 'DogLearnedTrick':
        assert event.stream_position == dog.version + 1
        assert event.stream_name == dog.id, (event.stream_name, dog.id)
        return Dog(
            id=dog.id,
            version=event.stream_position,
            is_from_snapshot=dog.is_from_snapshot,
            name=dog.name,
            tricks=dog.tricks + [data['trick']],
        )
    elif event.type == 'Snapshot':
        return Dog(
            id=remove_snapshot_stream_prefix(event.stream_name),
            version=deserialize(event.metadata)['version'],
            is_from_snapshot=True,
            name=data['name'],
            tricks=data['tricks'],
        )
    else:
        raise Exception(f"Unknown event type: {event.type}")
```

For convenience, let's also define a `get_dog()` function that calls `get_aggregate()`
with the `mutate_dog()` function as the value of its `mutator_func` argument.

```python
def get_dog(dog_id):
    return get_aggregate(
        aggregate_id=dog_id,
        mutator_func=mutate_dog,
    )
```

We can also define some "command" functions that append new events to the
database. The `register_dog()` function appends a `DogRegistered` event. The
`record_trick_learned()` appends a `DogLearnedTrick` event. The function
`snapshot_dog()` appends a `Snapshot` event. Notice that the
`record_trick_learned()` and `snapshot_dog()` functions use `get_dog()`.

Notice also that the `DogRegistered` and `DogLearnedTrick` events are appended to a
stream for aggregate events, whilst the `Snapshot` event is appended to a separate
stream for aggregate snapshots.

```python
def register_dog(name):
    dog_id = str(uuid.uuid4())
    event = NewEvent(
        type='DogRegistered',
        data=serialize({'name': name}),
    )
    client.append_event(
        stream_name=dog_id,
        current_version=None,
        event=event,
    )
    return dog_id


def record_trick_learned(dog_id, trick):
    dog = get_dog(dog_id)
    event = NewEvent(
        type='DogLearnedTrick',
        data=serialize({'trick': trick}),
    )
    client.append_event(
        stream_name=dog_id,
        current_version=dog.version,
        event=event,
    )


def snapshot_dog(dog_id):
    dog = get_dog(dog_id)
    event = NewEvent(
        type='Snapshot',
        data=serialize({'name': dog.name, 'tricks': dog.tricks}),
        metadata=serialize({'version': dog.version}),
    )
    client.append_event(
        stream_name=make_snapshot_stream_name(dog_id),
        current_version=-1,
        event=event,
    )
```

We can call `register_dog()` to register a new dog.

```python
# Register a new dog.
dog_id = register_dog('Fido')

dog = get_dog(dog_id)
assert dog.name == 'Fido'
assert dog.tricks == []
assert dog.version == 0
assert dog.is_from_snapshot is False

```

We can call `record_trick_learned()` to record that some tricks have been learned.

```python

# Record that 'Fido' learned a new trick.
record_trick_learned(dog_id, trick='roll over')

dog = get_dog(dog_id)
assert dog.name == 'Fido'
assert dog.tricks == ['roll over']
assert dog.version == 1
assert dog.is_from_snapshot is False


# Record that 'Fido' learned another new trick.
record_trick_learned(dog_id, trick='fetch ball')

dog = get_dog(dog_id)
assert dog.name == 'Fido'
assert dog.tricks == ['roll over', 'fetch ball']
assert dog.version == 2
assert dog.is_from_snapshot is False
```

We can call `snapshot_dog()` to record a snapshot of the current state of the `Dog`
aggregate. After we call `snapshot_dog()`, the `get_dog()` function will return a `Dog`
object that has been constructed using the `Snapshot` event.

```python
# Snapshot 'Fido'.
snapshot_dog(dog_id)

dog = get_dog(dog_id)
assert dog.name == 'Fido'
assert dog.tricks == ['roll over', 'fetch ball']
assert dog.version == 2
assert dog.is_from_snapshot is True
```

We can continue to evolve the state of the `Dog` aggregate, using
the snapshot both during the call to `record_trick_learned()` and
when calling `get_dog()` directly.

```python
record_trick_learned(dog_id, trick='sit')

dog = get_dog(dog_id)
assert dog.name == 'Fido'
assert dog.tricks == ['roll over', 'fetch ball', 'sit']
assert dog.version == 3
assert dog.is_from_snapshot is True
```

We can see from the `is_from_snapshot` attribute that the `Dog` object was indeed
reconstructed from the snapshot.

Snapshots can be created at fixed version number intervals, fixed time
periods, after a particular type of event, immediately after events are
appended, or as a background process.


### Read all events

The `read_all_events()` method can be used to get all recorded events
in the database in the order they were recorded. This method will return
a "read response" object, just like `iter_stream_events()`.

A "read response" is an iterator, and not a sequence. Recorded events can be
obtained by iterating over the "read response" object. It streams recorded
events from the server as the iteration proceeds. The iteration will automatically
stop when there are no more recorded events to be returned. The streaming of events,
and hence the iterator, can also be stopped by calling the `stop()` method on the
"read response" object.

Just like `read_stream_events()` and `iter_stream_events()`, the received event objects
are instances of the `RecordedEvent` class.

This method has seven optional arguments, `commit_position`, `backwards`,
`filter_exclude`, `filter_include`, `filter_by_stream_name`, `limit`, and `timeout`.

The optional `commit_position` argument is a Python `int` that can be used to
specify a commit position from which to start reading. The default value of
`commit_position` is `None`. Please note, if a commit position is specified,
it must be an actually existing commit position in the database.

The optional `backwards` argument is a Python `bool`. The default of `backwards` is
`False`, which means events are returned in the order they were recorded, If
`backwards` is `True`, then events are returned in reverse order.

If `backwards` is `False` and `commit_position` is `None`, the database's events will
be returned in the order they were recorded, starting from the first recorded event.
This is the default behavior of `read_all_events()`. If `backwards` is `True` and
`commit_position` is `None`, the database's events will be returned in reverse order,
starting from the last recorded event.

The optional `filter_exclude` argument is a sequence of regular expressions that
specifies which recorded events should be returned. This argument is ignored
if `filter_include` is set to a non-empty sequence. The default value of this
argument matches the event types of EventStoreDB "system events", so that system
events will not normally be included. See the Notes section below for more
information about filter expressions.

The optional `filter_include` argument is a sequence of regular expressions
that specifies which recorded events should be returned. By default, this
argument is an empty tuple. If this argument is set to a non-empty sequence,
the `filter_exclude` argument is ignored.

The optional `filter_by_stream_name` argument is a Python `bool` that indicates
whether the filtering will apply to event types or stream names. By default, this
value is `False` and so the filtering will apply to the event type strings of
recorded events.

The optional `limit` argument is an integer which restricts the number of events that
will be returned. The default value is `sys.maxint`.

The optional `timeout` argument is a Python `float` which sets a
deadline for the completion of the gRPC operation.

The filtering of events is done on the EventStoreDB server. The
`limit` argument is applied on the server after filtering.

The example below shows how to get all the events we have recorded in the database
so far, in the order they were recorded. We can see the three events of `stream_name1`
(`event1`, `event2` and `event3`) are included, along with others.

```python
# Read all events (creates a streaming gRPC call).
read_response = client.read_all_events()

# Convert the iterator into a sequence of recorded events.
events = tuple(read_response)
assert len(events) > 3  # more than three

# Convert the sequence of recorded events into a set of event IDs.
event_ids = set(e.id for e in events)
assert event1.id in event_ids
assert event2.id in event_ids
assert event3.id in event_ids
```

The example below shows how to read all recorded events in the database from
a particular commit position, in this case `commit_position1`. When reading
forwards from a specific commit position, the event at the specified position
will be included. The value of `commit_position1` is the position we obtained
when appending `event1`. And so `event1` is the first recorded event we shall
receive, `event2` is the second, and `event3` is the third.

```python
# Read all events forwards from a commit position.
read_response = client.read_all_events(
    commit_position=commit_position1
)

# Step through the "read response" iterator.
assert next(read_response).id == event1.id
assert next(read_response).id == event2.id
assert next(read_response).id == event3.id

# Stop the iterator.
read_response.stop()
```

The example below shows how to read all events recorded in the database in reverse
order. We can see that the first events we receive are the last events that were
recorded: the events of the `Dog` aggregate from the section about snapshotting
and the snapshot.

```python
# Read all events backwards from the end.
read_response = client.read_all_events(
    backwards=True
)

# Step through the "read response" iterator.
assert next(read_response).type == "DogLearnedTrick"
assert next(read_response).type == "Snapshot"
assert next(read_response).type == "DogLearnedTrick"
assert next(read_response).type == "DogLearnedTrick"
assert next(read_response).type == "DogRegistered"

# Stop the iterator.
read_response.stop()
```

The example below shows how to read a limited number of events
forwards from a specific commit position.

```python
events = tuple(
    client.read_all_events(
        commit_position=commit_position1,
        limit=1,
    )
)

assert len(events) == 1
assert events[0].id == event1.id
```

The example below shows how to read a limited number of the recorded events
in the database backwards from the end. In this case, the limit is 1, and
so we receive the last recorded event.

```python
events = tuple(
    client.read_all_events(
        backwards=True,
        limit=1,
    )
)

assert len(events) == 1

assert events[0].type == 'DogLearnedTrick'
assert deserialize(events[0].data)['trick'] == 'sit'
```

Please note, like the `iter_stream_events()` method, the `read_all_events()` method
is not decorated with retry and reconnect decorators, because the streaming of recorded
events from the server only starts when iterating over the "read response" starts, which
means that the method returns before the streaming starts, and so there is no chance for
any decorators to catch any connection issues.

### Get commit position

The `get_commit_position()` method can be used to get the commit position of the
last recorded event in the database. It simply calls `read_all_events()` with
`backwards=True` and `limit=1`, and returns the value of the `commit_position`
attribute of the last recorded event.

```python
commit_position = client.get_commit_position()
```

This method has four optional arguments, `filter_exclude`, `filter_include`,
`filter_by_stream_name` and `timeout`. These values are passed to `read_all_events()`.

The optional `filter_exclude`, `filter_include` and `filter_by_stream_name` arguments
work in the same way as they do in the `read_all_events()` method.

This optional `timeout` argument is a Python `float` that sets
a deadline for the completion of the gRPC operation.

This method might be used to measure progress of a downstream component
that is processing all recorded events, by comparing the current commit
position with the recorded commit position of the last successfully processed
event in a downstream component. In this case, the value of the `filter_exclude`,
`filter_include` and `filter_by_stream_name` arguments should equal those used
by the downstream component to obtain recorded events.


### Get stream metadata

The `get_stream_metadata()` method returns the metadata for a stream, along
with the version of the stream metadata.

```python
metadata, metadata_version = client.get_stream_metadata(stream_name=stream_name1)
```

The returned `metadata` value is a Python `dict`. The returned `metadata_version`
value is either an `int` if the stream exists, or `None` if the stream does not exist
and no metadata has been set. These values can be passed into `set_stream_metadata()`.


### Set stream metadata

*requires leader*

The method `set_stream_metadata()` sets the metadata for a stream. Stream metadata
can be set before appending events to a stream.

```python
metadata["foo"] = "bar"

client.set_stream_metadata(
    stream_name=stream_name1,
    metadata=metadata,
    current_version=metadata_version,
)
```

The `current_version` argument should be the current version of the stream metadata
obtained from `get_stream_metadata()`.

Please refer to the EventStoreDB documentation for more information about stream
metadata.

### Delete stream

*requires leader*

The method `delete_stream()` can be used to "delete" a stream.

```python
commit_position = client.delete_stream(stream_name=stream_name1, current_version=2)
```

After deleting a stream, it's still possible to append new events. Reading from a
deleted stream will return only events that have been appended after it was
deleted.

### Tombstone stream

*requires leader*

The method `tombstone_stream()` can be used to "tombstone" a stream.

```python
commit_position = client.tombstone_stream(stream_name=stream_name1, current_version=2)
```

After tombstoning a stream, it's not possible to append new events.


## Catch-up subscriptions

A "catch-up" subscription can be used to receive events that have already been
recorded in the database, and also events that are recorded subsequently.

The `subscribe_all_events()` method starts a catch-up subscription that can receive
all events in the database. The `subscribe_stream_events()` method starts a catch-up
subscription that can receive events from a specific stream.

The `subscribe_all_events()` and `subscribe_stream_events()` methods both return a
"read response" iterator, much like `iter_stream_events()` and `read_all_events()`.
The difference is the "read response" iterator returned for a catch-up subscription
does not automatically stop when there are no more recorded events to be returned, but
instead blocks on getting the next event until further events are recorded in the
database. These subsequently recorded events will then be streamed to the iterator,
which will then continue. Like `read_all_events()`, the returned "read response" has
a `stop()` method which will cancel the streaming gRPC operation and cause the
"read response" iterator to stop.

Like with `read_stream_events()` and `read_all_events()`, the recorded event objects
received from a catch-up subscription are instances of the `RecordedEvent` class.

### Subscribe all events

The`subscribe_all_events()` method can be used to start a catch-up subscription
from which all events recorded in the database can be received.

This method can be used by a downstream component that processes recorded events with
exactly-once semantics.

This method returns a "read response", from which recorded events can be
obtained by iteration, including events that are recorded after all the
recorded events have been received. Iterating over this "read response"
object will therefore not stop, unless the `stop()` method of the
"read response" object is called, or a connection issue occurs, or
the returned object iterator object is deleted from memory.

This method has an optional `commit_position` argument, which can be
used to specify a commit position from which to subscribe. The default
value is `None`, which means the subscription will operate from the first
recorded event in the database. If a commit position is given, it must match
an actually existing commit position in the database. The recoded events that
are obtained will not include the event recorded at that commit position.

This method also has four other optional arguments, `filter_exclude`,
`filter_include`, `filter_by_stream_name`, and `timeout`.

The optional `filter_exclude` argument is a sequence of regular expressions that
specifies which recorded events should be returned. This argument is ignored
if `filter_include` is set to a non-empty sequence. The default value of this
argument matches the event types of EventStoreDB "system events", so that system
events will not normally be included. See the Notes section below for more
information about filter expressions.

The optional `filter_include` argument is a sequence of regular expressions
that specifies which recorded events should be returned. By default, this
argument is an empty tuple. If this argument is set to a non-empty sequence,
the `filter_exclude` argument is ignored.

The optional `filter_by_stream_name` argument is a Python `bool` that indicates
whether the filtering will apply to event types or stream names. By default, this
value is `False` and so the filtering will apply to the event type strings of
recorded events.

The optional `timeout` argument is a Python `float` which sets a
deadline for the completion of the gRPC operation.

The example below shows how to start a catch-up subscription to receive
from the first recorded event in the database.

```python
# Subscribe from the first recorded event in the database.
subscription = client.subscribe_all_events()
```

The example below is longer, and shows that the catch-up subscription
does not stop automatically, but blocks when the last recorded event is
received, and then continues when subsequent events are recorded.

```python
# Append a new event to a new stream.
stream_name2 = str(uuid.uuid4())
event4 = NewEvent(type='OrderCreated', data=b'data4')
client.append_events(
    stream_name=stream_name2,
    current_version=None,
    events=[event4],
)

# Subscribe from the first recorded event in the database.
subscription = client.subscribe_all_events()
received_events = []


# Receive events from the catch-up subscription in a different thread.
from datetime import datetime
from threading import Thread

mark = datetime.now()

def receive_events():
    for event in subscription:
        received_events.append(event)
        global mark
        mark = datetime.now()


def wait_for_subscription_to_block():
    while True:
         if (datetime.now() - mark).total_seconds() > 1:
             break


thread = Thread(target=receive_events)
thread.start()

# Wait for the subscription to block.
wait_for_subscription_to_block()

# Check the last received event is 'event4'.
assert received_events[-1].id == event4.id

# Check we also received the other events we have recorded.
assert received_events[-9].id == event1.id
assert received_events[-8].id == event2.id
assert received_events[-7].id == event3.id
assert received_events[-6].type == "DogRegistered"
assert received_events[-5].type == "DogLearnedTrick"
assert received_events[-4].type == "DogLearnedTrick"
assert received_events[-3].type == "Snapshot"
assert received_events[-2].type == "DogLearnedTrick"

# Append another event whilst the subscription is running.
mark = datetime.now()
event5 = NewEvent(type='OrderUpdated', data=b'data5')
client.append_events(
    stream_name=stream_name2,
    current_version=0,
    events=[event5],
)

# Wait for the subscription to block.
wait_for_subscription_to_block()

# Check the last received event is 'event5'.
assert received_events[-2].id == event4.id
assert received_events[-1].id == event5.id

# Stop the subscription.
subscription.stop()
thread.join()
```

The example below shows how to start a catch-up subscription to
receive from a particular commit position, in this case from the
commit position of the last recorded event that was received above.
Another event is recorded before the subscription is restarted.
Further events are recorded whilst the subscription is running.
All the recorded events are received exactly once.

```python

# Append another event.
event6 = NewEvent(type='OrderDeleted', data=b'data6')
client.append_events(
    stream_name=stream_name2,
    current_version=1,
    events=[event6],
)

# Resume subscribing from the commit position of the last received event.
subscription = client.subscribe_all_events(
    commit_position=received_events[-1].commit_position
)

mark = datetime.now()
thread = Thread(target=receive_events)
thread.start()

# Wait for the subscription to block.
wait_for_subscription_to_block()

# Check the last received event was 'event6'.
assert received_events[-3].id == event4.id
assert received_events[-2].id == event5.id
assert received_events[-1].id == event6.id

# Append three more events to a new stream.
mark = datetime.now()
stream_name3 = str(uuid.uuid4())
event7 = NewEvent(type='OrderCreated', data=b'data7')
event8 = NewEvent(type='OrderUpdated', data=b'data8')
event9 = NewEvent(type='OrderDeleted', data=b'data9')

client.append_events(
    stream_name=stream_name3,
    current_version=None,
    events=[event7, event8, event9],
)

# Wait for the subscription to block.
wait_for_subscription_to_block()


# Check all the events have been received exactly once.
assert received_events[-6].id == event4.id
assert received_events[-5].id == event5.id
assert received_events[-4].id == event6.id
assert received_events[-3].id == event7.id
assert received_events[-2].id == event8.id
assert received_events[-1].id == event9.id

# Stop the subscription.
subscription.stop()
thread.join()
```

The catch-up subscription call is ended as soon as the subscription object's
`stop()` method is called. This happens automatically when it goes out of scope,
or when it is explicitly deleted from memory using the Python `del` keyword.

### Subscribe stream events

The `subscribe_stream_events()` method can be used to start a catch-up subscription
that can return events that are recorded in a single stream.

This method has a required `stream_name` argument, which specifies the name of the
stream from which recorded events will be received.

This method also has two optional arguments, `stream_position`, and `timeout`.

The optional `stream_position` argument specifies a position in the stream from which
recorded events will be received. The event at the specified stream position will not
be included. The default value of `stream_position` is `None`, which means the
subscription will start from the first recorded event in the stream.

The optional `timeout` argument is a Python `float` that sets
a deadline for the completion of the gRPC operation.

The example below shows how to start a catch-up subscription from
the first recorded event in a stream.

```python
# Subscribe from the start of 'stream2'.
subscription = client.subscribe_stream_events(stream_name=stream_name2)
```

The example below shows how to start a catch-up subscription from
a particular stream position.

```python
# Subscribe to stream2, from the second recorded event.
subscription = client.subscribe_stream_events(
    stream_name=stream_name2,
    stream_position=1,
)
```

### How to implement exactly-once event processing

The commit positions of recorded events that are received and processed by a
downstream component are usefully recorded by the downstream component, so that
the commit position of last processed event can be determined when processing is
resumed.

The last recorded commit position can be used to specify the commit position from which
to subscribe when processing is resumed. Since this commit position will represent the
position of the last successfully processed event in a downstream component, so it
will be usual to want the next event after this position, because that is the next
event that has not yet been processed. For this reason, when subscribing for events
from a specific commit position using a catch-up subscription in EventStoreDB, the
recorded event at the specified commit position will NOT be included in the sequence
of recorded events that are received.

To accomplish "exactly-once" processing of recorded events in a downstream
component when using a catch-up subscription, the commit position of a recorded
event should be recorded atomically and uniquely along with the result of processing
recorded events, for example in the same database as materialised views when
implementing eventually-consistent CQRS, or in the same database as a downstream
analytics or reporting or archiving application. By recording the commit position
of recorded events atomically with the new state that results from processing
recorded events, "dual writing" in the consumption of recorded events can be
avoided. By also recording the commit position uniquely, the new state cannot be
recorded twice, and hence the recorded state of the downstream component will be
updated only once for any recorded event. By using the greatest recorded commit
position to resume a catch-up subscription, all recorded events will eventually
be processed. The combination of the "at-most-once" condition and the "at-least-once"
condition gives the "exactly-once" condition.

The danger with "dual writing" in the consumption of recorded events is that if a
recorded event is successfully processed and new state recorded atomically in one
transaction with the commit position recorded in a separate transaction, one may
happen and not the other. If the new state is recorded but the position is lost,
and then the processing is stopped and resumed, the recorded event may be processed
twice. On the other hand, if the commit position is recorded but the new state is
lost, the recorded event may effectively not be processed at all. By either
processing an event more than once, or by failing to process an event, the recorded
state of the downstream component might be inaccurate, or possibly inconsistent, and
perhaps catastrophically so. Such consequences may or may not matter in your situation.
But sometimes inconsistencies may halt processing until the issue is resolved. You can
avoid "dual writing" in the consumption of events by atomically recording the commit
position of a recorded event along with the new state that results from processing that
event in the same atomic transaction. By making the recording of the commit positions
unique, so that transactions will be rolled back when there is a conflict, you will
prevent the results of any duplicate processing of a recorded event being committed.

Recorded events received from a catch-up subscription cannot be acknowledged back
to the EventStoreDB server. Acknowledging events, however, is an aspect of "persistent
subscriptions". Hoping to rely on acknowledging events to an upstream
component is an example of dual writing.


## Persistent subscriptions

In EventStoreDB, "persistent" subscriptions are similar to catch-up subscriptions,
in that reading a persistent subscription will block when there are no more recorded
events to be received, and then continue when new events are subsequently recorded.

Persistent subscriptions can

Persistent subscriptions can be consumed by a group of consumers operating with one
of the supported "consumer strategies".

The significant different with persistent subscriptions is the server will keep track
of the progress of the consumers. The consumer of a persistent subscription will
therefore need to "acknowledge" when a recorded event has been processed successfully,
and otherwise "negatively acknowledge" a recorded event that has been received but was
not successfully processed.

All of this means that for persistent subscriptions there are "create", "read", "update"
"delete", "ack", and "nack" operations to consider.

Whilst there are some advantages of persistent subscriptions, in particular the
concurrent processing of recorded events by a group of consumers, by tracking in
the server the position in the commit sequence of events that have been processed,
the issue of "dual writing" in the consumption of events arises. Reliability in the
processing of recorded events by a group of persistent subscription consumers will
rely on their idempotent handling of duplicate messages, and their resilience to
out-of-order delivery.


### Create subscription

*requires leader*

The `create_subscription()` method can be used to create a "persistent subscription"
to all the recorded events in the database across all streams.

This method has a required `group_name` argument, which is the
name of a "group" of consumers of the subscription.

This method also has seven optional arguments, `from_end`, `commit_position`,
`filter_exclude`, `filter_include`, `filter_by_stream_name`, `consumer_strategy`,
and `timeout`.

The optional `from_end` argument can be used to specify that the group of consumers
of the subscription should only receive events that were recorded after the subscription
was created.

Alternatively, the optional `commit_position` argument can be used to specify a commit
position from which commit position the group of consumers of the subscription should
receive events. Please note, the recorded event at the specified commit position might
be included in the recorded events received by the group of consumers.

If neither `from_end` or `commit_position` are specified, the group of consumers
of the subscription will potentially receive all recorded events in the database.

The optional `filter_exclude` argument is a sequence of regular expressions that
specifies which recorded events should be returned. This argument is ignored
if `filter_include` is set to a non-empty sequence. The default value of this
argument matches the event types of EventStoreDB "system events", so that system
events will not normally be included. See the Notes section below for more
information about filter expressions.

The optional `filter_include` argument is a sequence of regular expressions
that specifies which recorded events should be returned. By default, this
argument is an empty tuple. If this argument is set to a non-empty sequence,
the `filter_exclude` argument is ignored.

The optional `filter_by_stream_name` argument is a Python `bool` that indicates
whether the filtering will apply to event types or stream names. By default, this
value is `False` and so the filtering will apply to the event type strings of
recorded events.

The optional `consumer_strategy` argument is a Python `str` that defines
the consumer strategy for this persistent subscription. The value of this argument
can be `'DispatchToSingle'`, `'RoundRobin'`, `'Pinned'`, or `'PinnedByCorrelation'`. The
default value is `'DispatchToSingle'`.

The optional `timeout` argument is a Python `float` which sets a
deadline for the completion of the gRPC operation.

The method `create_subscription()` does not return a value. Recorded events are
obtained by calling the `read_subscription()` method.

In the example below, a persistent subscription is created to operate from the
first recorded non-system event in the database.

```python
# Create a persistent subscription.
group_name1 = f"group-{uuid.uuid4()}"
client.create_subscription(group_name=group_name1)
```

### Read subscription

*requires leader*

The `read_subscription()` method can be used by a group of consumers to receive
recorded events from a persistent subscription that has been created using
the `create_subscription()` method.

This method has a required `group_name` argument, which is
the name of a "group" of consumers of the subscription specified
when `create_subscription()` was called.

This method also has an optional `timeout` argument, that
is expected to be a Python `float`, which sets a deadline
for the completion of the gRPC operation.

This method returns a `PersistentSubscription` object, which is an iterator
giving `RecordedEvent` objects. It also has `ack()`, `nack()` and `stop()`
methods.

```python
subscription = client.read_subscription(group_name=group_name1)
```

The `ack()` method should be used by a consumer to indicate to the server that it
has received and successfully processed a recorded event. This will prevent that
recorded event being received by another consumer in the same group. The `ack()`
method takes an `event_id` argument, which is the ID of the recorded event that
has been received.

The example below iterates over the subscription object, and calls `ack()`. The
`stop()` method is called when we have received the last event, so that we can
continue with the examples below.

```python
events = []
for event in subscription:
    events.append(event)

    # Acknowledge the received event.
    subscription.ack(event_id=event.id)

    # Stop when 'event9' has been received.
    if event.id == event9.id:
        subscription.stop()
```

The received events are the events we appended above.

```python
assert events[-14].id == event1.id
assert events[-13].id == event2.id
assert events[-12].id == event3.id
assert events[-11].type == "DogRegistered"
assert events[-10].type == "DogLearnedTrick"
assert events[-9].type == "DogLearnedTrick"
assert events[-8].type == "Snapshot"
assert events[-7].type == "DogLearnedTrick"
assert events[-6].id == event4.id
assert events[-5].id == event5.id
assert events[-4].id == event6.id
assert events[-3].id == event7.id
assert events[-2].id == event8.id
assert events[-1].id == event9.id
```

The `PersistentSubscription` object also has an `nack()` method that should be used
by a consumer to negatively acknowledge to the server that it has received but not
successfully processed a recorded event. The `nack()` method takes an `event_id`
argument, which is the ID of the recorded event that has been received, and an `action`
argument, which should be a Python `str`, either `'unknown'`, `'park'`, `'retry'`,
`'skip'` or `'stop'`.


### How to write a persistent subscription consumer

The reading of a persistent subscription can be encapsulated in a "consumer" that calls
a "policy" function when a recorded event is received and then automatically calls
`ack()` if the policy function returns normally, and `nack()` if it raises an exception,
perhaps retrying the event for a certain number of times before parking the event.

The simple example below shows how this might be done. We can see that 'event9' is
acknowledged before 'event5' is finally parked.


```python
acked_events = {}
nacked_events = {}


class ExampleConsumer:
    def __init__(self, subscription, max_retries, final_action):
        self.subscription = subscription
        self.max_retries = max_retries
        self.final_action = final_action
        self.error = None

    def run(self):
        try:
            for event in self.subscription:
                try:
                    self.policy(event)
                except Exception:
                    if event.retry_count < self.max_retries:
                        action = "retry"
                    else:
                        action = self.final_action
                    self.subscription.nack(event.id, action=action)
                    self.after_nack(event, action)
                else:
                    self.subscription.ack(event.id)
                    self.after_ack(event)
        except Exception:
            self.subscription.stop()
            raise

    def stop(self):
        self.subscription.stop()

    def policy(self, event):
        # Raise an exception when we see "event5".
        if event.id == event5.id:
            raise Exception()

    def after_ack(self, event):
        # Track retry count of acked events.
        acked_events[event.id] = event.retry_count

    def after_nack(self, event, action):
        # Track retry count of nacked events.
        nacked_events[event.id] = event.retry_count

        if action == self.final_action:
            # Stop the consumer, so we can continue with the examples.
            self.stop()


# Create subscription.
group_name = f"group-{uuid.uuid4()}"
client.create_subscription(group_name, commit_position=commit_position1)

# Read subscription.
subscription = client.read_subscription(group_name)

# Construct consumer.
consumer = ExampleConsumer(
    subscription=subscription,
    max_retries=5,
    final_action="park",
)

# Run consumer.
consumer.run()

# Check 'event9' was acked and never retried.
assert acked_events[event9.id] == 0
assert event9.id not in nacked_events

# Check 'event5' was retried five times and never acked.
assert nacked_events[event5.id] == 5
assert event5.id not in acked_events
```

### Get subscription info

*requires leader*

The `get_subscription_info()` method can be used to get information for a
persistent subscription.

This method has one required argument, `group_name`, which
should match the value of the argument used when calling `create_subscription()`.

This method also has an optional `timeout` argument, that
is expected to be a Python `float`, which sets a deadline
for the completion of the gRPC operation.

```python
subscription_info = client.get_subscription_info(
    group_name=group_name1,
)
```

The returned value is a `SubscriptionInfo` object.

### List subscriptions

*requires leader*

The `list_subscriptions()` method can be used to get information for all
existing persistent subscriptions.

This method has an optional `timeout` argument, that
is expected to be a Python `float`, which sets a deadline
for the completion of the gRPC operation.

```python
subscriptions = client.list_subscriptions()
```

The returned value is a list of `SubscriptionInfo` objects.

### Update subscription

*requires leader*

The `update_subscription()` method can be used to update a
"persistent subscription".

This method has a required `group_name` argument, which is the
name of a "group" of consumers of the subscription.

This method also has three optional arguments, `from_end`, `commit_position`,
and `timeout`.

The optional `from_end` argument can be used to specify that the group of consumers
of the subscription should only receive events that were recorded after the subscription
was updated.

Alternatively, the optional `commit_position` argument can be used to specify a commit
position from which commit position the group of consumers of the subscription should
receive events. Please note, the recorded event at the specified commit position might
be included in the recorded events received by the group of consumers.

If neither `from_end` or `commit_position` are specified, the group of consumers
of the subscription will potentially receive all recorded events in the database.

Please note, the filter options and consumer strategy cannot be adjusted.

The optional `timeout` argument is a Python `float` which sets a
deadline for the completion of the gRPC operation.

The method `update_subscription()` does not return a value.

In the example below, a persistent subscription is updated to run from the end of the
database.

```python
# Create a persistent subscription.
client.update_subscription(group_name=group_name1, from_end=True)
```

### Create stream subscription

*requires leader*

The `create_stream_subscription()` method can be used to create a persistent
subscription for a stream.

This method has two required arguments, `group_name` and `stream_name`. The
`group_name` argument names the group of consumers that will receive events
from this subscription. The `stream_name` argument specifies which stream
the subscription will follow. The values of both these arguments are expected
to be Python `str` objects.

The method also has four optional arguments, `stream_position`, `from_end`,
`consumer_strategy`, and `timeout`.

This optional `stream_position` argument specifies a stream position from
which to subscribe. The recorded event at this stream
position will be received when reading the subscription.

This optional `from_end` argument is a Python `bool`.
By default, the value of this argument is `False`. If this argument is set
to `True`, reading from the subscription will receive only events
recorded after the subscription was created. That is, it is not inclusive
of the current stream position.

The optional `consumer_strategy` argument is a Python `str` that defines
the consumer strategy for this persistent subscription. The value of this argument
can be `'DispatchToSingle'`, `'RoundRobin'`, `'Pinned'`, or `'PinnedByCorrelation'`. The
default value is `'DispatchToSingle'`.

This method also takes an optional `timeout` argument, that
is expected to be a Python `float`, which sets a deadline
for the completion of the gRPC operation.

This method does not return a value. Events can be received by calling
`read_stream_subscription()`.

The example below creates a persistent stream subscription from the start of the stream.

```python
# Create a persistent stream subscription from start of the stream.
group_name2 = f"group-{uuid.uuid4()}"
client.create_stream_subscription(
    group_name=group_name2,
    stream_name=stream_name2,
)
```

### Read stream subscription

*requires leader*

The `read_stream_subscription()` method can be used to read a persistent
stream subscription.

This method has two required arguments, `group_name` and `stream_name`, which
should match the values of arguments used when calling `create_stream_subscription()`.

This method also has an optional `timeout` argument, that
is expected to be a Python `float`, which sets a deadline
for the completion of the gRPC operation.

This method returns a `PersistentSubscription` object, which is an iterator
giving `RecordedEvent` objects, that also has `ack()`, `nack()` and `stop()`
methods.

```python
subscription = client.read_stream_subscription(
    group_name=group_name2,
    stream_name=stream_name2,
)
```

The example below iterates over the subscription object, and calls `ack()`.
The for loop breaks when we have received the last event in the stream, so
that we can finish the examples in this documentation.

```python
events = []
for event in subscription:
    events.append(event)

    # Acknowledge the received event.
    subscription.ack(event_id=event.id)

    # Stop when 'event6' has been received.
    if event.id == event6.id:
        subscription.stop()
```

We can check we received all the events that were appended to `stream_name2`
in the examples above.

```python
assert len(events) == 3
assert events[0].stream_name == stream_name2
assert events[0].id == event4.id
assert events[1].stream_name == stream_name2
assert events[1].id == event5.id
assert events[2].stream_name == stream_name2
assert events[2].id == event6.id
```

### Get stream subscription info

*requires leader*

The `get_stream_subscription_info()` method can be used to get information for a
persistent subscription for a stream.

This method has two required arguments, `group_name` and `stream_name`, which
should match the values of arguments used when calling `create_stream_subscription()`.

This method also has an optional `timeout` argument, that
is expected to be a Python `float`, which sets a deadline
for the completion of the gRPC operation.

```python
subscription_info = client.get_stream_subscription_info(
    group_name=group_name2,
    stream_name=stream_name2,
)
```

The returned value is a `SubscriptionInfo` object.


### List stream subscriptions

*requires leader*

The `list_stream_subscriptions()` method can be used to get information for all
the persistent subscriptions for a stream.

This method has one required argument, `stream_name`.

This method also has an optional `timeout` argument, that
is expected to be a Python `float`, which sets a deadline
for the completion of the gRPC operation.

```python
subscriptions = client.list_stream_subscriptions(
    stream_name=stream_name2,
)
```

The returned value is a list of `SubscriptionInfo` objects.

### Update stream subscription

*requires leader*

The `update_stream_subscription()` method can be used to update a
persistent subscription for a stream.

This method has a required `group_name` argument, which is the
name of a "group" of consumers of the subscription, and a required
`stream_name` argument, which is the name of a stream.

This method also has three optional arguments, `from_end`, `stream_position`,
and `timeout`.

The optional `from_end` argument can be used to specify that the group of consumers
of the subscription should only receive events that were recorded after the subscription
was updated.

Alternatively, the optional `stream_position` argument can be used to specify a stream
position from which commit position the group of consumers of the subscription should
receive events. Please note, the recorded event at the specified stream position might
be included in the recorded events received by the group of consumers.

If neither `from_end` or `commit_position` are specified, the group of consumers
of the subscription will potentially receive all recorded events in the stream.

Please note, the consumer strategy cannot be adjusted.

The optional `timeout` argument is a Python `float` which sets a
deadline for the completion of the gRPC operation.

The `update_stream_subscription()` method does not return a value.

In the example below, a persistent subscription for a stream is updated to run from the
end of the stream.

```python
# Create a persistent subscription.
client.update_stream_subscription(
    group_name=group_name2,
    stream_name=stream_name2,
    from_end=True,
)
```

### Replay parked events

*requires leader*

The `replay_parked_events()` method can be used to "replay" events that have
been "parked" (negatively acknowledged with the action `'park'`) when reading
a persistent subscription. Parked events will then be received by the consumers
reading from the persistent subscription.

This method has one required argument, `group_name`. It has one optional argument,
`stream_name`. The values of these arguments should match those used when calling
`create_subscription()` or `create_stream_subscription()`.

This method also has an optional `timeout` argument, that
is expected to be a Python `float`, which sets a deadline
for the completion of the gRPC operation.

The example below replays parked events for group `group_name1`.

```python
client.replay_parked_events(
    group_name=group_name1,
)
```

The example below replays parked events for group `group_name2`.

```python
client.replay_parked_events(
    group_name=group_name2,
    stream_name=stream_name2,
)
```

### Delete persistent subscription

*requires leader*

The `delete_persistent_subscription()` method can be used to delete a persistent
subscription.

This method has one required argument, `group_name`. It has one optional argument,
`stream_name`. The values of these arguments should match those used when calling
`create_subscription()` or `create_stream_subscription()`.

This method also has an optional `timeout` argument, that
is expected to be a Python `float`, which sets a deadline
for the completion of the gRPC operation.

The example below deletes the subscription for group `group_name1` which was created
by calling `create_subscription()`.

```python
client.delete_persistent_subscription(
    group_name=group_name1,
)
```

The example below deletes the subscription for group `group_name2` which was created
by calling `create_stream_subscription()`.

```python
client.delete_persistent_subscription(
    group_name=group_name2,
    stream_name=stream_name2,
)
```

## Connection

### Reconnect

The `reconnect()` method can be used to manually reconnect the client to a
suitable EventStoreDB node. This method uses the same routine for reading the
cluster node states and then connecting to a suitable node according to the
client's node preference that is specified in the connection string URI when
the client is constructed. This method is thread-safe, in that when it is called
by several threads at the same time, only one reconnection will occur. Concurrent
attempts to reconnect will block until the client has reconnected successfully,
and then they will all return normally.

```python
client.reconnect()
```

An example of when it might be desirable to reconnect manually is when (for performance
reasons) the client's node preference is to be connected to a follower node in the
cluster, and, after a cluster leader election, the follower becomes the leader.
Reconnecting to a follower node in this case is currently beyond the capabilities of
this client, but this behavior might be implemented in a future release.

Please note, nearly all the client methods are decorated with `@autoreconnect` (which
calls the `reconnect()` method when the client detects that reconnecting is required)
and a `@retry` decorator that more generally will retry operations that fail due to
connection issues.

The `@autoreconnect` decorator will reconnect to a suitable node in the cluster when
the server to which the client has been connected has become unavailable, or when the
client's gRPC channel happens to have been closed. The client will also reconnect when
a method is called that requires a leader, and the client's node preference is to be
connected to a leader, but the node that the client has been connected to stops being
the leader. In this case, the client will reconnect to the current leader. After
reconnecting, the failed operation will be retried.

The `@retry` decorator retries operations that have failed due to more general
connection issues, such as a deadline being reached (so that the operation times
out), or in case the server throws an exception when handling a client request.

Please also note, the aspects not covered by the reconnect and retry decorator
behaviours have to do with methods that return iterators. For example, consider
the "read response" iterator returned from the `read_all_events()` method. The
`read_all_events()` method will have returned, and the method decorators will therefore
have exited, before iterating over the "read response" begins. Therefore, if a
connection issues occurs whilst iterating over the "read response", it isn't possible
for any decorator on the `read_all_events()` method to trigger a reconnection.

Another example is iterating over the "read response" from a catch-up subscription.
Although, with these methods there is an initial "confirmation" response from the server
which is received and checked by the client before the method returns the
"read response" iterator. And so, when the call is made, if the server is unavailable,
or if the channel has somehow been closed, then the client will reconnect and retry.
However, if an event-processing component that is iterating over a successfully returned
catch-up subscription "read response" somehow fails, the catch-up subscription will
need to be restarted, using the event-processing component's "last saved commit position".
This is completely safe, so long as the event-processing component has been recording
the commit position of each recorded event atomically and uniquely along with any new
state that results from processing the recorded events and the commit positions are
recorded with a uniqueness constraint. In this case, the client will automatically
reconnect to a node in the cluster when the subsequent call to a catch-up subscription
method is made. Similarly, when reading persistent subscriptions, if there are
connectivity issues after you have started iterating over a successfully received
response, then the consumer will need to be restarted.


### Close

The `close()` method can be used to cleanly close the client's gRPC connection.

```python
client.close()
```


## Asyncio client

The `esdbclient` package also includes an early version of an asynchronous I/O
gRPC Python client. It follows exactly the same behaviors as the multithreaded
`ESDBClient`, but uses the `grpc.aio` package and the `asyncio` module, instead of
`grpc` and `threading`.

The async function `AsyncioESDBClient` constructs the client, and connects to
a server. It can be imported from `esdbclient`, and can be called with the same
arguments as `ESDBClient`. It supports both the "esdb" and the "esdb+discover"
connection string URI schemes, and can connect to both "secure" and "insecure"
EventStoreDB servers. It reconnects or retries when connection issues or server
errors are encountered.

```python
from esdbclient import AsyncioESDBClient
```

The asynchronous I/O client has the following methods: `append_events()`,
`read_stream_events()`, `read_all_events()`, `subscribe_all_events()`,
`delete_stream()`, `tombstone_stream()`, and `reconnect()`.

These methods are equivalent to the methods on `ESDBClient`. They have the same
method signatures, and can be called with the same arguments, to the same effect.
The methods which appear on `ESDBClient` but not on `AsyncioESDBClient` will be
added soon.

### Synopsis

The example below demonstrates the `append_events()`, `read_stream_events()` and
`subscribe_all_events()` methods. These are the most useful methods for writing
an event-sourced application, allowing new aggregate events to be recorded, the
recorded events of an aggregate to be obtained so aggregates can be reconstructed,
and the state of an application to propagated and processed with "exactly-once"
semantics.

```python
import asyncio

async def demonstrate_asyncio_client():

    # Construct client.
    client = await AsyncioESDBClient(
        uri=os.getenv("ESDB_URI"),
        root_certificates=os.getenv("ESDB_ROOT_CERTIFICATES"),
    )

    # Append events.
    stream_name = str(uuid.uuid4())
    event1 = NewEvent("OrderCreated", data=b'{}')
    event2 = NewEvent("OrderUpdated", data=b'{}')
    event3 = NewEvent("OrderDeleted", data=b'{}')

    commit_position = await client.append_events(
        stream_name=stream_name,
        current_version=None,
        events=[event1, event2, event3]
    )

    # Read stream events.
    recorded = await client.read_stream_events(stream_name)
    assert len(recorded) == 3
    assert recorded[0].id == event1.id
    assert recorded[1].id == event2.id
    assert recorded[2].id == event3.id


    # Subscribe all events.
    received = []
    async for event in await client.subscribe_all_events():
        received.append(event)
        if event.commit_position == commit_position:
            break
    assert received[-3].id == event1.id
    assert received[-2].id == event2.id
    assert received[-1].id == event3.id


    # Close the client.
    await client.close()


# Run the demo.
asyncio.get_event_loop().run_until_complete(
    demonstrate_asyncio_client()
)
```

## Notes

### Regular expression filters

The `read_all_events()`, `subscribe_all_events()`, `create_subscription()`
and `get_commit_position()` methods have `filter_exclude` and `filter_include`
arguments. This section provides some more details about the values of these
arguments.

The default value of the `filter_exclude` arguments is designed to exclude
EventStoreDB "system" and "persistence subscription config" events, which
otherwise would be included.

System events generated by EventStoreDB have `type` strings that start with
the `$` sign. Persistence subscription events generated when manipulating
persistence subscriptions have `type` strings that start with `PersistentConfig`.

For example, to match the type of EventStoreDB system events, use the regular
expression string `r'\$.+'`. Please note, the constant `ESDB_SYSTEM_EVENTS_REGEX` is
set to this value. You can import this constant from `esdbclient` and use it when
building longer sequences of regular expressions.

Similarly, to match the type of EventStoreDB persistence subscription events, use the
regular expression `r'PersistentConfig\d+'`. The constant `ESDB_PERSISTENT_CONFIG_EVENTS_REGEX`
is set to this value. You can import this constant from `esdbclient`  and use it when
building longer sequences of regular expressions.

The constant `DEFAULT_EXCLUDE_FILTER` is a sequence of regular expressions that includes
both `ESDB_SYSTEM_EVENTS_REGEX` and `ESDB_PERSISTENT_CONFIG_EVENTS_REGEX`. It is used
as the default value of `filter_exclude` so that the events that EventStoreDB generates
internally are excluded by default, events other than to those which you record using
the `append_events()` method.

If you want to exclude, for example, snapshots from the recorded events returned when
reading events from the database, then you may wish to use a appropriately extended
copy of `DEFAULT_EXCLUDE_FILTER` as the value of the `filter_exclude` arguments.


## Contributors

### Install Poetry

The first thing is to check you have Poetry installed.

    $ poetry --version

If you don't, then please [install Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installing-with-the-official-installer).

    $ curl -sSL https://install.python-poetry.org | python3 -

It will help to make sure Poetry's bin directory is in your `PATH` environment variable.

But in any case, make sure you know the path to the `poetry` executable. The Poetry
installer tells you where it has been installed, and how to configure your shell.

Please refer to the [Poetry docs](https://python-poetry.org/docs/) for guidance on
using Poetry.

### Setup for PyCharm users

You can easily obtain the project files using PyCharm (menu "Git > Clone...").
PyCharm will then usually prompt you to open the project.

Open the project in a new window. PyCharm will then usually prompt you to create
a new virtual environment.

Create a new Poetry virtual environment for the project. If PyCharm doesn't already
know where your `poetry` executable is, then set the path to your `poetry` executable
in the "New Poetry Environment" form input field labelled "Poetry executable". In the
"New Poetry Environment" form, you will also have the opportunity to select which
Python executable will be used by the virtual environment.

PyCharm will then create a new Poetry virtual environment for your project, using
a particular version of Python, and also install into this virtual environment the
project's package dependencies according to the project's `poetry.lock` file.

You can add different Poetry environments for different Python versions, and switch
between them using the "Python Interpreter" settings of PyCharm. If you want to use
a version of Python that isn't installed, either use your favourite package manager,
or install Python by downloading an installer for recent versions of Python directly
from the [Python website](https://www.python.org/downloads/).

Once project dependencies have been installed, you should be able to run tests
from within PyCharm (right-click on the `tests` folder and select the 'Run' option).

Because of a conflict between pytest and PyCharm's debugger and the coverage tool,
you may need to add ``--no-cov`` as an option to the test runner template. Alternatively,
just use the Python Standard Library's ``unittest`` module.

You should also be able to open a terminal window in PyCharm, and run the project's
Makefile commands from the command line (see below).

### Setup from command line

Obtain the project files, using Git or suitable alternative.

In a terminal application, change your current working directory
to the root folder of the project files. There should be a Makefile
in this folder.

Use the Makefile to create a new Poetry virtual environment for the
project and install the project's package dependencies into it,
using the following command.

    $ make install-packages

It's also possible to also install the project in 'editable mode'.

    $ make install

Please note, if you create the virtual environment in this way, and then try to
open the project in PyCharm and configure the project to use this virtual
environment as an "Existing Poetry Environment", PyCharm sometimes has some
issues (don't know why) which might be problematic. If you encounter such
issues, you can resolve these issues by deleting the virtual environment
and creating the Poetry virtual environment using PyCharm (see above).

### Project Makefile commands

You can start EventStoreDB using the following command.

    $ make start-eventstoredb

You can run tests using the following command (needs EventStoreDB to be running).

    $ make test

You can stop EventStoreDB using the following command.

    $ make stop-eventstoredb

You can check the formatting of the code using the following command.

    $ make lint

You can reformat the code using the following command.

    $ make fmt

Tests belong in `./tests`. Code-under-test belongs in `./esdbclient`.

Edit package dependencies in `pyproject.toml`. Update installed packages (and the
`poetry.lock` file) using the following command.

    $ make update-packages
